the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
so radioactive to decay is kind of a
classic example of a first order process
so we are doing one little tiny section
of the chapter on nuclear chemistry and
we're doing that all today and so all
we're really covering is problems
associated with first-order processes so
there's a this is just just a small
introduction to this idea
all right so radioactive decay has a lot
of applications there are medical
applications including imaging organs
and bones including the heart and so
there is a compound that you already saw
called cardio light and so we talked
about this in transition metals because
you have a transition metal and what is
the geometry of this compound which are
what kind of field strength strong yeah
so this compound was designed in part by
an MIT professor Alan Davison you could
go talk to him about this incredible
discovery and invention it's used about
seven million times a year to image
various organs and has been for a very
long time it's off patent now but this
this this patent made Alan Davison MIT
and MIT chemistry department an enormous
amount of money and so you could go talk
to him about it except he's happily
retired living on one of his homes so so
you can't really do that but anyway so
this uses an isotope of technetium which
is metastable isotope and so it's 99
it's an isotope of the the normal 98
atomic mass and so the next challenge
they're always looking for the next
great thing the next great imaging agent
so that's this is still a very active
area of research and there was actually
a talk just this week on campus about
work in this area so this is transition
metals combined with radioactivity so
it's a two topics here and in the class
so another of course important use is
the potential of nuclear energy and the
current use of nuclear
energy this has many challenges and I
don't want to go on record of what I
think about nuclear energy I think it's
a complicated problem there are a lot of
challenges but one I like to bring up
because I think it's particularly
interesting to me is what to do with
waste and so one story that I heard
about actually there was a documentary
made about this Finland is had this idea
to create this 3 mile long tunnel and
they wanted to store 12 thousand metric
tons of nuclear waste and they wanted
the containers to store it for a hundred
thousand years and this documentary
asked a number of questions about this
idea such as what kind of container do
you use and how do you know the material
you design your container is gonna last
a hundred thousand years as experimental
scientists we like to test how long
things last but you can't really do this
experiment also kind of brought up the
idea do you guard this facility for a
hundred thousand years because you can
make bombs out of a lot of this
radioactive waste so you kind of need to
protect it but maybe you should just
bury it and then you know no one knows
it's there so you don't have to guard it
so they can't find it use it but then
what if someone stumbles upon it and
releases all of this radioactivity so
that would be bad so do you put warning
signs for people who will be around a
hundred thousand years from now saying
hey don't go in here it looks like a
pretty tunnel but hey you know the
half-life of the things stored here are
a hundred thousand years so this is this
is pretty radioactive still don't go
inside and if you write this sign what
language do you put it in so the
documentary pointed out that you know
the Neanderthals existed by forty five
forty thousand years ago so a hundred
thousand years from now what's going to
be going on how do you write a sign to
people that long in the future
anyway I just think that these are sort
of interesting ideas and brings up the
point that as scientists and engineers
we need to think not only about the
science and engineering were doing but
the ramifications to society and
and sort of sociology as well as
politics involved in some of this this
science so this is an interesting area
for that intersection of the social
sciences and the Natural Sciences and
engineering alright
so radioactive decay definitely a useful
thing dangerous and useful all at the
same time oh look at that
you know the clicker questions coming up
at the bottom of the page okay we're not
there yet
it's okay we're not there yet all right
radio I just added that at the end I
apparently didn't animate it well
alright so the decay of a nucleus is
independent of how many nuclei are
around it
that's what makes it a first order
process so because it's a first order
process we can apply those first order
integrated rate laws that we just
derived
so we had our rate law that the
concentration of something a equals its
original concentration to the e to the
minus K which is our rate constant times
time and also our half-life equation
that we just used so instead of
concentration of a though we're gonna
have a different thing to express what
we're interested in here which is n the
number of nuclei so we can just write
that same expression down but instead of
concentration of egg we're just gonna
use capital n so n the number of nuclei
at some particular time equals how many
nuclei were present originally times
each and the minus K and here it is a
rate constant still but it's a decay
constant in that the rate you're
measuring is radioactive decay so it
kind of has a special name although if
you use rate constant for that that's
that is what it is
so that's okay T is still time and yes n
to the O is the original number of
nuclei so we're just going to do a
clicker question about how one goes
about calculating the number of nuclei
all right ten more seconds
all right so uh someone want to tell me
for one of the green lantern t-shirts
what is wrong with the other answers I
think I saw your hand up first sorry
folks let's see so answers 1 & 2 they
have the wrong is that the molar mass of
techne is that technetium yeah
and answer 4 does not multiply by
Avogadro's number so that's gonna give
you the number of moles of the particle
okay it's Thanksgiving I thought we
needed a good prize today ok so right so
one thing you also want to remember sort
of your make sure that your units are
good and it's really important in doing
this you can take this back to remember
to use use the number that is here this
atomic mass number not the one from the
periodic table in in calculating the
problem Oh actually the periodic table
disappeared from that oh well okay so
it's it's if you use the periodic table
it's a closed answer but sometimes
sometimes it won't be so close but
remember when it tells you about the
isotope it always has the atomic mass
that you should be using in the problem
as part of the question so keep that in
mind
alright and yeah you definitely want to
remember Avogadro's number and if the
answers are such that it's hard to tell
that you messed up with the wavelength
it's really easy to tell you messed up
if you didn't use Avogadro's number so
it doesn't make any sense
with these it's a little harder alright
so remember to use the isotopes atomic
mass and also remember to use Avogadro's
number when doing this and then then you
should be fine all right so this is
really similar it's really similar
depending on whether you're talking
about chemical kinetics or nuclear
kinetics and doing these problems in
terms of the equations but in chemical
kinetics you're measuring the
concentration
whereas with nuclear kinetics you're
measuring two K events and so usually
how do you measure decay events and the
most common way is here our Geiger
counter so just want to it's always
important every once in awhile and MIT
to double-check that the rooms that
you're teaching in have not been
contaminated by some wonderful
experiments so so far we're good so here
this is working you can hear the chips I
think this is this is pretty good you
don't have to be concerned about this
there's always some background level
it's fine
so there are gases in here that will get
ionized by radiation which gives off
then that's translated into that
clicking noise so that's what has
happening so it's measuring with our
thing whether there are any radioactive
events going on and this is called a
Geiger counter and we use x-rays in my
lab so I went and and stole this from
our x-ray facility before I came here
luckily it's almost Thanksgiving so no
one was collecting any data so no one
will get in trouble for taking this
right now and Hans Geiger is the person
who came up with this idea and this
device does anyone remember where we
heard that name before think back class
too
so he did that amazing gold foil
experiment and so our ping-pong balls
that we were throwing we're duplicating
the experiment that he did as a graduate
student and luckily I think he was smart
enough to realize that when you're
working with things he was working with
a lot of radioactivity at that point the
one should know exactly how much
radioactivity you're working with and so
you know these are very early day
experiments and he came up with this
device that helped him know how safe he
was and this is still you know the sort
of the standard thing to have these
around and double check that Radio 8
that there is no radiation leaks in
places like that
so the Geiger counter alright so also a
couple of more terminology things decay
rate is also called activity or specific
activity so you're talking about sort of
how active your substance is that's
really you know how
how radioactive is it and activity also
has the letter a so you're talking about
the concentration of a and now we have a
again there's a lot of A's in this unit
so that's the change now in the number
of nuclei over time that's the rate
expression or the rate law
okay the decay constant times the number
of nuclei and because activity is
proportional to the number of nuclei we
can also take this expression that we
had before that had the ends in it and
rewrite it with a so now it's really
just like that first-order expression we
had but without the concentration term
so we have the activity at some time
equals the original activity of the
material times e to the minus KT and all
of these equations are going to be on
your equation sheet but you know if you
mess up and use the wrong equation for
this it doesn't matter as long as you're
using the first-order equation whether
it's concentration or activity it's the
same idea that you can you can determine
if you know the rate constant or the
decay constant how much material is left
how much activity is left how many
nuclei are left after a given amount of
time all right so I know what you're all
thinking now you're thinking this is
fantastic but what about the units we
must hear about the units so the SI
units for for activity are the Becker
lbq and one becker l is one radioactive
disintegration per second and this is
the newer unit the older unit was called
a Curie and sometimes you will still see
this in the literature and a Curie one
Curie was three point seven times ten to
the tenth disintegrations per second so
it's a much larger number than the
current SI unit so this was what one
gram of radium specific activity was so
they use this big number but it's not
was not really practical because you
want to tell people like how much
radiation would be safe for them to have
in a year or something like that and you
didn't want to use this this giant
number for that so we've moved to here
so sending one no or I want to guess who
who the older unit was unnamed four of
radioactivity
one might think Marie Curie but a lot of
the evidence suggests it was actually or
her husband Pierre Curie who it was
named after it's a bit controversial but
they both work together and they worked
with on Rebecca rel and they all won the
1903 Nobel Prize for discovering
radioactivity three years later on
Pierre Curie was killed crossing the
street he slipped when it was raining
and a horse and wagon I guess ran over
him and killed him so this is I think an
example of you know someone who's so
brilliant but you say they're so
brilliant but do they look both ways
before they cross the street so you are
all very brilliant I encourage you look
both ways before you cross the street
anyway so he he died and some of the
stories are that they named the unit
after him as a tribute others say well
it's really for both of them but in any
case now it's named after the third
person honoree Becker L okay
so radioactivity I'm going to tell you a
little bit about radioactivity this
chart is not in your handout because
you're not responsible for knowing all
this information so I just didn't put it
in there but you can look this up
there's a couple of points I did make in
your handout which is there are
different types of radioactive nuclear
radiation we have alpha we have alpha
particles alpha decay beta decay gamma
decay some of those involve a mass
change so like an alpha particle is same
as a helium four nucleus two protons two
neutrons beta decay involves an electron
gamma is a photon so there there are
definitely different types some mass
change some not there also
really dramatic differences in half-life
so again half-life depends on material
in question it depends on that decay
constant that rate constant and if we
look at this table we can see things
from milliseconds and if we look at some
of these D is for day a is for year Y is
also for year so sometimes you'll see Y
for years sometimes you'll see a I think
most people guess that Y is for a year
that a is for year I don't really know
but anyway in this table it's a so if
you see that don't be confused and G a
that's Giga years so 10 10 to the 9th
that's where the Finland a hundred
thousand years comes from that we need
to keep the stuff safe for a very very
very very very very long amount of time
for gigging years okay so in some decay
processes such as uranium 238 you have
more than one type of nuclear radiation
going on and it can involve a very long
and complicated series of different
events so here at MIT we spend most of
our time talking about science and
engineering but I feel like every once
in a while we should throw in some
poetry into our science classes so once
a year I like to read a chemistry poem
to enrich our lives and today is that
day in 2014 and the poem I'm going to
read to you is called the days of our
half-lives and it is by Professor malla
radhakrishnan she got her PhD here at
MIT in the chemistry department and she
wrote this book which she wanted me to
point out is available on Amazon if
you're looking for a Christmas present
for a very very geeky friend of yours
and so and it's illustrated by another
MIT chemistry PhD Mary o Reilly who
actually did the illustrations for the
videos that I've been showing you in
class so I might chemists just really
multi tile
two individuals okay so I will read you
this poem now and I as I read it to you
I will point out what is happening in
this decay process because all of mallas
poetry is scientifically correct right
mm-hmm so days of our half lives my
dearest love I am writing you to tell
you all that I've been through I've
changed my whole identity but loved I
can't pretend to be when I was
uranium-238 you were on my case to start
losing weight for five billion years I'd
hoped and I prayed and finally I had an
alpha decay two protons and two neutrons
went right out the door and now I was
thorium-234 but my nucleus was still
unfit for your eyes not positive enough
for its large size but this time my
half-life was not very long because my
will to change was really quite strong
it took just a month not even a
millennium to beta decay into
protactinium but still rejected me right
off the bat protactinium who's heard of
that so beta decay I did once more to
become uranium 234 myself again but a
new isotope you still weren't satisfied
but I still had hope three alpha decays
it was hard but I stayed on through
thorium then radium and then radon I
thought that I would finally please you
my mass was a healthy 222 but you said
although I like your mass I don't want
to be with a noble gas
they dress so well you had a point
though I wasn't reactive so in order to
please you I stayed proactive a few days
later I found you and said to more alpha
decays and now I am led but you shook
your head you were not too keen on my
mass number of to 14 I had a bad
experience with that mass before and an
unstable a Satine walked right out the
door so in order to change I went away
but all I could do was just beta decay
my hopes in my dream started to go under
coz beta decay does not change a mass
number two bismuth and polonium I hoped
and I beckoned
my half-life was one six four
microseconds and then finally I alpha
decayed and then I was led with a prize
worthy mass of 210 got to admit I was
getting quite tired and my patience with
you had nearly expired you weren't more
demanding than any I dated and much of
my energy had been liberated but you
still weren't happy but you had a fix I
really like the number 206 so I waited
for years until the day which began with
another beta decay and then one more and
finally in the end i alpha'd to lead-206
my friend to change any further I
wouldn't be able no longer active but
happily stable it took me a million
years to do but look how I've changed
and all just for you wait what did you
say I've gotten so old that you'd rather
be with a young lass of gold well I give
up
we're through my pumpkin sure all my
effort be counting for something well
you won't be able to rule me and
more cuz I'm leaving you not for one
atom but for that's right
well you were away defusing I found some
chlorines that I found quite amusing
and we're going to form lead cl4 and you
won't be hearing from me anymore see
over the years I've grown quite wise
I've learned that love's about
compromise you still have half of your
half-life's to live so go out there it's
your turn to give thank you
there's a whole book of them on Amazon
okay so that is first order first order
is pretty exciting that has nuclear
decay second order not quite as exciting
but we should talk about it anyway
alright so second order integrated rate
laws we're not going to go through a
derivation it's in your book but here is
the equation if you do do the derivation
so now we have one over the
concentration of a at time T equals rate
constant K times T plus 1 over the
original concentration of a and we could
plot this one over concentration of T
versus time and if we did that you would
have the opportunity for another clicker
question
all right ten more seconds all right
nine days yeah it's kind of hard to come
up with clicker questions in this unit
so but but it's fun for Thanksgiving
we'll have lots of 90s ok so right so we
can just look and this is actually an
expression for a straight line again so
we're plotting on the y-axis one over
our concentration of a any and all the
various different times and versus time
over here and so our intercept is going
to be 1 over the initial concentration
of a and our slope is going to be what
okay right so again you can measure your
concentration as it changes with time
how the concentration tank changes plot
it and just determine your rate constant
for that particular material all right
so second-order half-life we can do
another derivation but in this case I
will just give you the equation so
half-life equals 1 over K times your
original concentration of a and so this
is different from first-order there is a
concentration term in the equation so in
for second-order half-life it does
depend on the starting concentration so
that's really the big difference in
first-order it doesn't depend on the
starting concentration just depends on
the rate constant or the decay constant
which depends on the material in
question the second-order you do need to
know how much you had originally so
again how do you know if it's a first or
a second order process and here it you
really have to determine it
experimentally so one thing you could do
is measure how it changes over time and
then plot your data using the equation
for first-order and you may see that
yeah that does not form a straight line
so when you're plotting with natural log
of a concentration of a but then if you
try plotting it one over the
concentration of a
may get a beautiful straight line with
your data and so you'd say that's the
second order process so again you're
determining these things experimentally
collecting data plotting the data
determining rate constants determining
the order of the reaction all right now
this is very exciting what we're going
to talk about is the relationship
between rate constants and equilibrium
constants so I love this I love when we
come back to stuff that we've talked
about before and see it in a slightly
different way so at equilibrium we
talked about how it's a dynamic process
and you have the rate of the forward
reaction equal the rate of the reverse
reaction the reactions are still going
they haven't stopped but the rates are
equal in both directions so we've talked
about how to write an equilibrium
constant for a reaction so if we are her
actions a plus B going to C plus D we
can write our equilibrium constant K and
its products over reactants unless one
of our products or reactants is a solid
or a very dilute solution it's the
solvent and I heard from your TAS that
in the last pom set some people had
forgotten what goes into Q or K
expressions so that's good to review
that for this next unit and exam for in
the final so products over reactants now
suppose I tell you that it's a second
order process and the rate of the
forward reaction here a plus B we can
write the rate law for that forward
reaction being second order first order
in a second or and first order in B so
the rate constant for the forward
direction is k1 and then times the
concentration of a time's the
concentration of B for the reverse
reaction the rate constant is K minus
one and this is generally true and all
the problems if it's the first step you
have plus 1 K 1 on the top K minus 1 on
the bottom so we have K minus 1
times the concentration of C and D so
that's the backward direction alright so
at equilibrium these rates are equal we
just talked about that we've seen that
before the rate of the forward reaction
so k1 times a times B is equal to K
minus 1 times C times D when you're at
equilibrium so we can rearrange this
equation now and say C and D over here
over divided by a and B it's going to be
equal to k1 over K minus 1 and we also
just saw that C times D over a times B
was equal to K so therefore our
equilibrium constant K equals k1 the
rate constant for the forward direction
over K minus 1 the rate constant for the
reverse direction so here we're relating
equilibrium constants and rate constants
so we've thought a lot about what's true
if you have a big equilibrium constant
if you have an equilibrium constant much
greater than 1 what's the ratio to
products and reactants at equilibrium
they're more or less products more so we
thought about that and now we can think
about the relationship of the rate
constants so if K is greater than 1 is
k1 greater than less than K minus 1
great and so that would then be the case
where you have more products than
reactants at equilibrium if K is less
than 1 a case where there's more
reactants than products at equilibrium
then you have K 1 is less than K minus 1
so again we can think about this in
terms of thermodynamics we can also now
think about it in terms of rates ok so
one more thing that we need to cover
before we end today and that is about
elementary steps and molecularity which
I just love saying that word
so on Monday we're going to talk about
mechanism of reactions most reactions do
not occur in one step and we need to
think about mechanisms I said it was
Wednesday if it's actually Monday so
it's coming up it's a very exciting and
we're gonna talk a lot about elementary
steps when we talk about mechanisms so
an elementary step is one of the steps
in the reaction so reactions usually
don't occur in one step they have many
steps in each step is called an
elementary reaction so we talked about
last time that for the overall order of
the reaction you can't just look at the
stochiometry and say what the order of
the reaction is so you can't predict it
from so qiyamah tree for an overall
reaction but if it's an elementary
reaction if it's a step that elementary
reaction is written exactly as it occurs
so in that case the order and the rate
law can be predicted so this is you're
breaking it down into sort of the
smallest unit the smallest step this
elementary reaction so you can just look
at the stochiometry for a single step
for an elementary reaction and project
to the order and the rate law so
elementary reactions occur exactly as
written so that's what we're gonna do on
Monday we're gonna break down our
elementary our mechanisms into
elementary steps write out the rate laws
and then figure out what kind of
mechanism we might have all right so
finally molecularity so molecularity is
just the number of things that come
together to form a product and here we
have three names uni molecular by
molecular and term molecular uni
molecular process what do you guess how
many reactants are coming together to
form product one by molecular what do
you get to term molecular is a little
harder but just give it a whirl three
yes
so by molecular is very common
so and termolecular is not so I have
three three molecules to come together
and if you try to think about how you
get three things to come together all at
the same time that's kind of rare
usually when there are three things
reacting there multiple steps involved
but two is good now finally we'll end
with a clicker question think about
which of these would be examples of uni
molecular processes ten seconds
so it actually is one and two so most
people got the - yes that's radioactive
decay but the other you can have a
decomposition so here we have
decomposition into its elements is also
a first order process alright happy
Thanksgiving everybody see you next
Monday
you